README.md, before:

Belter Creole Crash Course

# Phonology
The pronunciation of most letters seems to be the same as in english, except for 'x', that sounds like 'kh'.
*Special cases*:
 - 'ch' -"**ch**eck"
 - 'dzh' -"**j**ump"
 - 'ng' -"si**ng**" (**g** is dropped)
 - 'ny' -"ca**ny**on"
 - 'ow' -"th**ough**t" or "n**o**t"
 - 'sh' -"**sh**eep"
 - 'x' -"**h**ere"

# Articles
"wa" -"*a*", "*an*
"da" -"*the*"

# Pronouns
|     | Singular     | Plural                |
|-----|--------------|-----------------------|
| 1st | mi (I)       | milowda (we)          |
| 2nd | to (you)     | tolowda (you)         |
| 3rd | im (they/it) | imalowda, imim (they) |

# Tenses
Belter Creole has 3 tenses: past, present, future. All of them are constructed via special modifiers that are placed before the verb.
|         | Belter | English equivalent |
|---------|--------|--------------------|
| past    | ta     | did or -ed         |
| present | -      | do or -            |
| future  | gonya  | going to, will     |

# Grammatical Aspects
Very similar to tenses (constructed via modifiers too), but instead of the time of the action they denote its behavior (don't know how to explain, but you'll get it, just go further).
|            | Belter  | English equivalent                           |
|------------|---------|----------------------------------------------|
| continuous | ando    | present continuous (smth in progress)        |
| habitual   | tili    | present simple (smth that happens regularly) |
| perfective | finyish | present perfect (a finished action)          |

# Questions
Questions are formed by adding *-ke* at the end of the sentence.

kemang = who
kepelésh = where
ketim = when
keting = what
kewe = how
kéweting = what kind/type
kéradzhang = why, for what reason
kédawang = which
kelowda = how many/much

# Numbers (fuck, it is not gonna be that ez)
|   |        |    |            |     |             |
|---|--------|----|------------|-----|-------------|
| 0 | nada   | 10 | teng       | 100 | xanya       |
| 1 | wang   | 20 | tuteng     | 200 | tuxanya     |
| 2 | tu     | 30 | seriteng   | 300 | serixanya   |
| 3 | seri   | 40 | futeng     | 400 | fuxanya     |
| 4 | fu     | 50 | faveteng   | 500 | favexanya   |
| 5 | faf    | 60 | sikeseteng | 600 | sikesexanya |
| 6 | sikesh | 70 | sengeteng  | 700 | sengexanya  |
| 7 | seng   | 80 | eteteng    | 800 | etexanya    |
| 8 | et     | 90 | nangeteng  | 900 | nangexanya  |
| 9 | nang   |    |            |     |             |


# Resources
[Dictionary](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18EYF96hf9d3huND26ztVmf12w713HD2gl9oCIfXBkyo/edit#gid=0)

[Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belter_Creole)

[Fandom](https://expanse.fandom.com/wiki/Belter_Creole)

[Small course](https://app.memrise.com/course/1102952/belter-creole/1/)

# Ischenko's extension
Due to the lack of the words in the language, I propose a new keyword -"wu" (pronounced like "vu"). If you want to use some english word, that currently has no translation in Belter Creole, you can use that english word directly in your speech, but "wu" must be placed after it.
For example, "knights of nigts" would be "knihgts wu fo nax".

Commit message:

translator added + fixed the proposal

README.md, after:

Belter Creole Crash Course

# Phonology
The pronunciation of most letters seems to be the same as in english, except for 'x', that sounds like 'kh'.
*Special cases*:
 - 'ch' -"**ch**eck"
 - 'dzh' -"**j**ump"
 - 'ng' -"si**ng**" (**g** is dropped)
 - 'ny' -"ca**ny**on"
 - 'ow' -"th**ough**t" or "n**o**t"
 - 'sh' -"**sh**eep"
 - 'x' -"**h**ere"

# Articles
"wa" -"*a*", "*an*
"da" -"*the*"

# Pronouns
|     | Singular     | Plural                |
|-----|--------------|-----------------------|
| 1st | mi (I)       | milowda (we)          |
| 2nd | to (you)     | tolowda (you)         |
| 3rd | im (they/it) | imalowda, imim (they) |

# Tenses
Belter Creole has 3 tenses: past, present, future. All of them are constructed via special modifiers that are placed before the verb.
|         | Belter | English equivalent |
|---------|--------|--------------------|
| past    | ta     | did or -ed         |
| present | -      | do or -            |
| future  | gonya  | going to, will     |

# Grammatical Aspects
Very similar to tenses (constructed via modifiers too), but instead of the time of the action they denote its behavior (don't know how to explain, but you'll get it, just go further).
|            | Belter  | English equivalent                           |
|------------|---------|----------------------------------------------|
| continuous | ando    | present continuous (smth in progress)        |
| habitual   | tili    | present simple (smth that happens regularly) |
| perfective | finyish | present perfect (a finished action)          |

# Questions
Questions are formed by adding *-ke* at the end of the sentence.

kemang = who
kepelésh = where
ketim = when
keting = what
kewe = how
kéweting = what kind/type
kéradzhang = why, for what reason
kédawang = which
kelowda = how many/much

# Numbers (fuck, it is not gonna be that ez)
|   |        |    |            |     |             |
|---|--------|----|------------|-----|-------------|
| 0 | nada   | 10 | teng       | 100 | xanya       |
| 1 | wang   | 20 | tuteng     | 200 | tuxanya     |
| 2 | tu     | 30 | seriteng   | 300 | serixanya   |
| 3 | seri   | 40 | futeng     | 400 | fuxanya     |
| 4 | fu     | 50 | faveteng   | 500 | favexanya   |
| 5 | faf    | 60 | sikeseteng | 600 | sikesexanya |
| 6 | sikesh | 70 | sengeteng  | 700 | sengexanya  |
| 7 | seng   | 80 | eteteng    | 800 | etexanya    |
| 8 | et     | 90 | nangeteng  | 900 | nangexanya  |
| 9 | nang   |    |            |     |             |


# Resources
[Dictionary](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18EYF96hf9d3huND26ztVmf12w713HD2gl9oCIfXBkyo/edit#gid=0)

[Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belter_Creole)

[Fandom](https://expanse.fandom.com/wiki/Belter_Creole)

[Small course](https://app.memrise.com/course/1102952/belter-creole/1/)

[Translator](https://lingojam.com/BelterTranslator)

# Ischenko's extension
Due to the lack of the words in the language, I propose a new keyword - "wu" (pronounced like "vu"). If you want to use some english word, that currently has no translation in Belter Creole (or you don't have time to look it up), you can use the english word directly in your speech, but "wu" must be placed after it.
For example, "knights of nights" would be "knights wu fo nax".
